The Lance–Fort Union Composite Total Petroleum System (CTPS) in the Southwestern Wyoming Province is a genetically related system of source rocks and hydrocarbon accumulations contained within Upper Cretaceous and lower Tertiary strata. The CTPS includes the Fox Hills Sandstone and overlying Lance Formation (Upper Cretaceous: Maastrichtian), and lower Tertiary rocks in the Fort Union Formation (Paleocene), and in the Wasatch (part) and Battle Spring Formations (Eocene). The petroleum system encompasses about 6,112,000 acres (9,550 square miles) in Wyoming and Colorado and includes the Great Divide, Washakie, and Sand Wash structural basins and intervening Wamsutter arch and Cherokee ridge. The stratigraphic base of the petroleum system is placed at the contact between the Fox Hills Sandstone and the underlying Lewis Shale; this contact is intertonguing and conformable. Definition of the stratigraphic top of the CTPS is somewhat problematic because of intertonguing of the Wasatch and Green River Formations. In general, where lacustrine shale units in the Green River Formation are present, the top of the petroleum system is placed at the base of the lowest, pervasive lacustrine shale unit in the Green River Formation. This horizon generally corresponds to the top of the main body of the Wasatch Formation, or the top of age equivalent units in the Hiawatha Member of the Wasatch Formation near the Rock Springs uplift, and in the Red Desert Tongue of the Wasatch Formation in the central part of the Great Divide Basin. Where lacustrine shale units in the Green River Formation are not present, the top of the CTPS is placed at the top of the undifferentiated Wasatch Formation or at the top of age equivalent units in the Battle Spring Formation. Coal beds and associated noncoal, carbonaceous strata within the Lance and Fort Union Formations are considered to be the primary source rocks for hydrocarbon generation within the Lance–Fort Union CTPS; these source rocks are composed of humic, Type-III organic matter, and thus, are considered to be gas prone. Source rocks in the basal part of the Lance Formation have reported thermal maturity (Ro) values ranging from less than 0.50 percent to more than 1.60 percent, based on direct measurements of vitrinite reflectance from Lance coal and carbonaceous shale beds, or extrapolated from vitrinite reflectance values for the top of the Lewis Shale. Measured Ro values for coal and carbonaceous source rocks near the base of the Fort Union Formation range from less than 0.50 percent to about 1.53 percent. Within the CTPS, the highest reported Ro values for the Lance and Fort Union Formations were measured at depths from about 12,000 to 13,000 feet in the deep, south-central part of the Washakie Basin. Primary reservoirs in the Lance–Fort Union CTPS are fluvial sandstone deposits in the Lance, Fort Union, and Wasatch Formations, with additional reservoirs in marginal marine (shoreface) sandstone in the Fox Hills Sandstone. Gas generated from deeply buried coal and carbonaceous strata migrated relatively short distances into low-permeability (tight) sandstone reservoirs in close proximity to mature source rocks. Hydrocarbons in the CTPS also migrated vertically and laterally (updip) into shallow (less than 8,000 feet) reservoirs in conventional accumulations along basin margins or on intervening structural arches. Because of the generally discontinuous nature of fluvial sandstone units and the presence of thick, relatively impermeable mudstone and siltstone successions within the Lance, Fort Union, and Wasatch Formations, faults or fracture systems may have been critical for successful hydrocarbon migration from source rocks at depth into shallow conventional reservoirs. Coal beds in the Lance and Fort Union Formations also serve both as source rocks and as reservoirs for potential coalbed-gas accumulations. The Lance–Fort Union CTPS contains undiscovered gas resources in continuous accumulations (basin-centered gas and coalbed-gas resources) and gas and oil resources in shallow conventional accumulations. Within the CTPS, four assessment units have been defined: the Lance–Fort Union Continuous Gas Assessment Unit, the Lance Coalbed Gas Assessment Unit, the Fort Union Coalbed Gas Assessment Unit, and the Lance–Fort Union Conventional Oil and Gas Assessment Unit. The mean estimate of total undiscovered gas resources in the Lance–Fort Union Composite Total Petroleum System  2 Petroleum Systems and Geologic Assessment of Oil and Gas in the Southwestern Wyoming Province, Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah is about 8.9 trillion cubic feet (TCF). Of this total, a mean of about 7.6 TCF is included in the Lance–Fort Union Continuous Gas Assessment Unit, a mean of 0.17 TCF is estimated for the Lance Coalbed Gas Assessment Unit, and a mean of about 0.94 TCF is estimated for the Fort Union Coalbed Gas Assessment Unit. An additional mean estimate of about 0.25 TCF of undiscovered gas is included in the Lance–Fort Union Conventional Oil and Gas Assessment Unit. Undiscovered natural gas resources in the Lance–Fort Union CTPS represent about 10 percent of the mean estimated total of 84.6 TCF of gas in the Southwestern Wyoming Province.


The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) periodically conducts assessments of the recoverable oil and natural gas resources of areas within the United States and also in other regions of the world. The purpose of these assessments is to develop geology-based, well-documented estimates of quantities of petroleum having the potential to be added to reserves within some future time frame. For the National Oil and Gas Assessment (NOGA) series begun by the USGS in 2000, the future time frame—the forecast span—is 30 years. In recent years, the USGS has distinguished between conventional and continuous petroleum accumulations for purposes of resource assessment (Gautier and others, 1995; U.S. Geological Survey National Oil and Gas Resource Assessment Team, 1995; U.S. Geological Survey World Energy Assessment Team, 2000). Briefly stated, conventional accumulations are described in terms of discrete fields or pools localized in structural or stratigraphic traps by the buoyancy of oil or gas in water. In contrast, continuous accumulations are petroleum accumulations (oil or gas) that have large spatial dimensions and indistinctly defined boundaries, and which exist more or less independently of the water column (Schmoker, 1995). Conventional accumulations “float,” bubble-like, in water; continuous accumulations do not. Because of their fundamental geologic dissimilarities, the USGS assesses conventional and continuous accumulations using different resource-assessment models and methods. The primary purpose of this report is to describe the fundamental concepts supporting USGS resource assessments of continuous accumulations. The basic assessment model, called the “FORSPAN” model, was first documented by Schmoker (1999) and has an antecedent in the approach used to assess continuous accumulations in the USGS 1995 National Assessment of United States Oil and Gas Resources (Gautier and others, 1995; Schmoker, 1995). FORSPAN is the model used to assess potential additions to reserves in continuous accumulations as part of the ongoing NOGA series of domestic petroleum assessments. Computer programs are used in conjunction with FORSPAN to calculate resource estimates. However, assessment results are controlled by geology-based and engineering-based input parameters, as opposed to computer-generated projections of historical statistical trends.


Continuous petroleum accumulations form a geologically diverse group that includes coalbed methane, “tight” gas, basin-center gas, oil and gas in fractured shale and chalk, gas hydrates, and shallow biogenic gas. Despite their obvious differences, these various petroleum deposits are linked together as continuous accumulations by two key geologic characteristics: (1) they consist of large volumes of rock pervasively charged with oil or gas, and (2) they do not depend upon the buoyancy of oil or gas in water for their existence. Because of these two geologic properties, continuous accumulations cannot be assessed in terms of the sizes and numbers of discrete entities delineated by down-dip water contacts, as are conventional fields. The so-called fields that are sometimes named within a continuous accumulation are not fields in the traditional sense, but rather are only generally defined areas within the continuous accumulation that have relatively better production characteristics (sweet spots). 2 Petroleum Systems and Geologic Assessment of Oil and Gas in the Southwestern Wyoming Province, Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah The commonly applied term “unconventional” is not used here as a synonym for continuous. Continuous accumulations are defined by a rather narrow set of geologic characteristics, whereas unconventional accumulations form a broader and more subjective category. Accumulations have been characterized as unconventional according to such widely varying standards as arbitrary matrix-permeability limits, special regulatory status, the need for unusual (at the time) engineering techniques, or difficulty of physical access (for example, polar regions or deep water). Many “unconventional” accumulation types are not unconventional in terms of resource assessment and do not require special assessment models and methods. Studies emphasizing the geology and production characteristics of continuous oil accumulations and continuous gas accumulations have been published by Schmoker (1996) and Schmoker and others (1996a), respectively. Common geologic characteristics of a continuous accumulation include occurrence down dip from water-saturated rocks, lack of obvious trap and seal, pervasive oil or gas charge, large areal extent, low matrix permeability, abnormal pressure (either high or low), and close association with source rocks. Common production characteristics include a large in-place petroleum volume, low recovery factor, absence of truly dry holes, dependence on fracture permeability, and sweet spots within the accumulation that have generally better production characteristics but where individual wells still have serendipitous “hit or miss” production characteristics. Continuous accumulations commonly contain little moveable water in the rock matrix but can produce copious volumes of water from fractures or cleats. Somewhat paradoxically, an interval of improved reservoir quality within a regional-scale continuous accumulation, such as a sandstone having good porosity and matrix permeability, can be undesirable because of high moveable-water content. Although virtually all wells drilled into a continuous accumulation encounter a petroleum-charged reservoir, it is very possible to drill wells that are economic failures. Therein lies the primary reason that many known continuous accumulations in the United States are developed only locally and have not yet contributed to U.S. oil and gas supplies at levels that might be expected based on their large in-place volumes.


Since the early 1970’s, potential petroleum-supply crises have been related to political events that disrupt the flow of imported oil. Twice in the last three decades, the routine of daily living in the United States has been changed by politically induced reductions in the supply of foreign oil. A second but less publicized type of potential petroleumsupply crisis relates to fundamental geologic limitations on the world supply of oil and natural gas. Thus far, this concern has remained theoretical. However, world demand for oil and gas is predicted to continue to rise, and much petroleum (especially oil) has already been produced. Petroleum is a nonrenewable resource on the time scale of human activities. Some people expect that in as short a time as one or two decades, geologic constraints rather than political constraints on the volumes of oil remaining to be discovered and on the rates at which oil can be produced will lead to a more or less permanent oil-supply crisis. Other observers point out that similar forecasts of gloom and doom have been with us almost since the beginning of commercial oil production. Such forecasts, they say, have proved to be poorly founded and will continue to be poorly founded because of a chronic tendency to underestimate (1) the abundance of oil in the ground, and (2) the pace and extent of technology advancement in the petroleum industry. This debate is complex and emotional, and it certainly cannot be resolved here. However, we can speak to one data element that is important to the discussion between petroleumsupply optimists and pessimists. That element is remaining petroleum reserves—the “inventory” of petroleum that is on hand, in the ground, waiting to be produced and sold. The remaining petroleum reserves of a country or of the world depend upon the difference between the volume of oil and gas that has been discovered in commercial accumulations and the volume that has been produced. Volumes produced are in general reasonably well known, but volumes of petroleum that have been discovered and can be economically recovered are difficult to estimate, as discussed in the following section. As a result, no one really knows how much petroleum has already been discovered but not yet produced. For the world, the magnitude of this uncertainty is on the scale of many hundreds of billion barrels of oil or (for gas) oil equivalent.


Since 1977, operators of oil and gas fields in the United States have been required to submit an annual report to the U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, that includes production figures and a careful estimate of remaining reserves for each field they operate. These sequential annual reports show that, at all stages in a field’s development history, the estimate of remaining reserves (and thus of field size, which equals cumulative production plus remaining reserves) is more likely to be too low than too high. In other words, as years pass, successive estimates of field size tend to increase. This phenomenon is referred to as reserve growth (also known as field growth, reserves appreciation, or oil-field reserve appreciation). Factors that contribute to reserve growth include: • Delineation of additional oil and gas in-place, through areal extensions of fields and development of new pools and reservoirs within fields. • Higher recovery percentages of the oil and gas in-place, resulting from infill drilling and the application of improved technology and advanced engineering methods. • Revisions of reserve calculations (commonly upward), based on experience gained in the course of developing and operating a field. Reserve-growth patterns of individual United States fields are highly variable. Indeed, the sizes of some fields are observed to decrease through time (negative growth). For United States fields taken as a whole, however, reserve growth is strongly positive and is a major component of remaining United States petroleum resources. Assessments of the remaining oil and gas potential of the United States and of the world are strongly affected by the assessor’s models and forecasts of future reserve growth.


Trends in four successive estimates of United States technically recoverable natural gas resources are examined in this report. The effective dates of these assessments were January 1 of 1975, 1980, 1987, and 1994. The 1994 estimate of the U.S. total gas endowment increased significantly over the previous three estimates, indicating that the technically recoverable endowment of gas is not an absolute volume, but rather is a quantity that can increase through time in response to advances in technology and in geologic understanding. Much of this increase was in the category of reserve growth. Reserve growth refers to additions to the estimated ultimate recovery of fields that typically occur as discovered fields are developed and produced. The potential for U.S. reserve growth, rather than being rapidly used up, appears to be sustainable for many years by intensive engineering efforts coupled with improving technology. Potential additions to reserves in continuous (unconventional) accumulations also represent a type of reserve growth, and were estimated (for the first time) in the 1994 assessment at 358 trillion cubic feet of gas. This resource category provides a significant new contribution to the estimated U.S. total gas endowment.


The U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI) periodically conducts geology-based assessments of the oil and natural gas resources of the United States. Four such systematic petroleum assessments have been completed since 1975 (Miller and others, 1975; Dolton and others, 1981; Mast and others, 1989; Gautier and others, 1995, together with Minerals Management Service, 1996). For the first and second assessments, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) was responsible for the entire United States. For the third and fourth assessments, the USGS was responsible for onshore areas and State waters of the United States, and the Minerals Management Service (MMS) was responsible for the Federal Offshore. This report considers the natural gas components of these assessments. Because a core of procedures and tenets was retained from one assessment to the next, changes through time in perceptions of the U.S. gas resource base can be attributed in large part to evolving technology and improved scientific understanding. In this report, the four successive estimates of the Nation’s technically recoverable natural gas resources are summarized in tables 1 and 2. Trends in the successive gas-resource estimates are examined, with a view toward better understanding the U.S. gas resource base in the context of the next few decades.


The first three DOI estimates of the U.S. endowment of technically recoverable total gas (cumulative production plus remaining resources, which are the sum of proved reserves, reserve growth, undiscovered conventional resources, and potential additions to reserves in continuous (unconventional) accumulations) were 1,404, 1,542, and 1,403 trillion cubic feet of gas (tcfg), respectively (fig. 1). Note that these three studies did not specifically include continuous gas resources as a separate resource-assessment category. The differences among these first three estimates are regarded as relatively minor, given the uncertainties associated with long-range petroleum assessments. Thus, the DOI assessments prepared during the 1970’s and 1980’s suggest a more or less fixed U.S. total gas endowment of 1,400 to 1,500 tcfg, of which almost one-half had been produced by 1987 (table 1). Against this background, the 1994 estimate of the U.S. total gas endowment increased significantly to 2,230 tcfg (fig. 1). This increase is interpreted here as indicative of a growing realization that the technically recoverable endowment of total gas is not an absolute volume, but rather is a quantity that can increase through time in response to advances in technology and in geologic understanding. This point is illustrated by the fact that continuous accumulations were assessed as a separate resource category by the USGS in their 1994 assessment of U.S. onshore areas and State waters (Gautier and others, 1995). Continuous accumulations are defined as deposits that are not localized by the buoyancy of gas in water; they lack welldefined downdip water contacts and thus include such diverse types of gas accumulations as tight gas, coal-bed gas, gas in shales and chalks, and basin-center gas (U.S. Geological Survey National Oil and Gas Resource Assessment Team, 1995). In contrast, conventional fields are considered to be discrete, countable deposits floating bubble-like in water, and delineated by downdip water contacts.